index.md, before:

---
layout: default
---

**86Box** is a hypervisor and IBM PC system emulator that specializes in running old operating systems and software designed for IBM PC systems and compatibles from 1981 through fairly recent system designs based on the PCI bus.

Features
--------
* Easy to use interface
* Cycle-accurate low level emulation of 8086-based processors up to the Pentium
* Great range of customizability of virtual machines
* Many available systems, such as the very first IBM PC 5150 from 1981, or the more obscure IBM PS/2 line of systems based on the Micro Channel Architecture
* Lots of supported peripherals including video adapters, sound cards, network adapters, hard disk controllers, and SCSI adapters
* MIDI output to Windows built-in MIDI support, FluidSynth, or emulated Roland synthesizers
* Supports running MS-DOS, older Windows versions, OS/2, many Linux distributions, or vintage systems such as BeOS or NEXTSTEP, and applications for these systems

Downloads
---------
The latest stable version of 86Box is version 2.07, which was released on November 20, 2019, and is available from our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/86Box/86Box/releases/tag/v2.07).

We also offer [nightly builds](https://github.com/86Box/86Box#nightly-builds), which are built off the latest source code, but may not be as stable and/or optimized as stable builds.

System requirements and recommendations
---------------------------------------
* Intel Core 2 or AMD Athlon 64 processor
* Windows 7 Service Pack 1, Windows 8.1 or Windows 10
* 4 GB of RAM

It is also recommended to use the [86Box Manager](https://github.com/86Box/86BoxManager) by [daviunic](https://github.com/daviunic) (Overdoze) to manage virtual machines even though it is possible to use 86Box on its own with the `--vmpath`/`-P` command line option.

Getting started
---------------
If you're a new user, click [here](gettingstarted) to see a brief tutorial on how to configure everything so you can start working.

Help
----
See [frequently asked questions](faq) for solutions to common problems with 86Box or join our IRC or Discord for assistance.

Get in touch
------------
You can reach us on our IRC channel or our Discord server to discuss anything related to retro computing and of course 86Box. We look forward to hearing from you!

[![Visit our IRC channel](https://kiwiirc.com/buttons/irc.ringoflightning.net/softhistory.png)](https://kiwiirc.com/client/irc.ringoflightning.net/?nick=github?#softhistory)

[![Visit our Discord server](https://discordapp.com/api/guilds/262614059009048590/embed.png)](https://discord.gg/v5fCgFw)

Licensing
---------
86Box is released under the [GNU General Public License, version 2](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html).

Commit message:

YouTube & Twitter pages
Since the YouTube channel has been viewed by many as 86Box's "only proper documentation" (t. tarlabnor), I suggest its promotion on the front page of the website, including our Twitter account.

Unfortunately, I don't have enough experience(TM) with Markdown to find a proper embed for Twitter, but I think that should do just fine for the time being.

index.md, after:

---
layout: default
---

**86Box** is a hypervisor and IBM PC system emulator that specializes in running old operating systems and software designed for IBM PC systems and compatibles from 1981 through fairly recent system designs based on the PCI bus.

Features
--------
* Easy to use interface
* Cycle-accurate low level emulation of 8086-based processors up to the Pentium
* Great range of customizability of virtual machines
* Many available systems, such as the very first IBM PC 5150 from 1981, or the more obscure IBM PS/2 line of systems based on the Micro Channel Architecture
* Lots of supported peripherals including video adapters, sound cards, network adapters, hard disk controllers, and SCSI adapters
* MIDI output to Windows built-in MIDI support, FluidSynth, or emulated Roland synthesizers
* Supports running MS-DOS, older Windows versions, OS/2, many Linux distributions, or vintage systems such as BeOS or NEXTSTEP, and applications for these systems

Downloads
---------
The latest stable version of 86Box is version 2.07, which was released on November 20, 2019, and is available from our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/86Box/86Box/releases/tag/v2.07).

We also offer [nightly builds](https://github.com/86Box/86Box#nightly-builds), which are built off the latest source code, but may not be as stable and/or optimized as stable builds.

System requirements and recommendations
---------------------------------------
* Intel Core 2 or AMD Athlon 64 processor
* Windows 7 Service Pack 1, Windows 8.1 or Windows 10
* 4 GB of RAM

It is also recommended to use the [86Box Manager](https://github.com/86Box/86BoxManager) by [daviunic](https://github.com/daviunic) (Overdoze) to manage virtual machines even though it is possible to use 86Box on its own with the `--vmpath`/`-P` command line option.

Getting started
---------------
If you're a new user, click [here](gettingstarted) to see a brief tutorial on how to configure everything so you can start working.

Help
----
See [frequently asked questions](faq) for solutions to common problems with 86Box or join our IRC or Discord for assistance.

Get in touch
------------
You can reach us on our IRC channel, Discord server or Twitter to discuss anything related to retro computing and, of course, 86Box. We look forward to hearing from you!

[![Visit our IRC channel](https://kiwiirc.com/buttons/irc.ringoflightning.net/softhistory.png)](https://kiwiirc.com/client/irc.ringoflightning.net/?nick=github?#softhistory)

[![Visit our Discord server](https://discordapp.com/api/guilds/262614059009048590/embed.png)](https://discord.gg/v5fCgFw)

[Twitter: @86BoxEmulator](https://twitter.com/86BoxEmulator)*

YouTube
-------
Our [YouTube channel](https://youtube.com/channel/UChBnf0oliV7Holdk6ILze_w)* contains detailed, high-quality 86Box tutorials and videos about various related topics.
###### The YouTube channel and Twitter account are managed by staff member DDX (@DDXofficial).

Licensing
---------
86Box is released under the [GNU General Public License, version 2](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html).
