---
layout: post
title: "86Box v3.5"
description: "Release for May 2022, now with native Apple Silicon support."
authors: ["richardg867"]
image: "/assets/images/v3.5/hero.png"
---

{% include imageheading.html url="/assets/images/v3.5/hero.png" separator=" " %}

This is the May 2022 update to 86Box, bringing bugfixes as well as the long-awaited **native Apple Silicon support** for macOS thanks to a very generous hardware contribution to our project. As always, you can [download 86Box v3.5 from GitHub](https://github.com/86Box/86Box/releases/tag/v3.5).

---

## Enter Apple Silicon

As outlined in the [v3.4 release post]({% post_url 2022-04-20-86box-v3-4 %}#now-with-macos), we were initially only able to provide an Intel binary for macOS due to **roadblocks** preventing us from compiling 86Box for Apple Silicon on our existing Intel hardware. This changes today: the macOS version of 86Box v3.5 is now an **universal binary**, capable of running natively on both Intel and Apple Silicon, making proper use of the M1 chip family's incredible performance and efficiency.

We would like to give massive thanks to **Matt Nawrocki** for providing an M1 Mac Mini for the project, and [**jriwanek**](https://github.com/jriwanek) for handling logistics and hosting. Native Apple Silicon builds would have been far from possible without their contributions; as we've stated in the previous post, acquiring or even just renting the required hardware would be a very costly endeavor for a project of our size.

Note that 86Box builds for macOS are **not signed by Apple**, since signing would bring in yet another expense (the Apple developer program). This unfortunately results in 86Box being targeted by **macOS security features**, but these can be worked around without compromising your system's security:

* Gatekeeper may initially **prevent you from opening 86Box**, with a warning about checking for malicious software. After getting that warning, you should **Control-click** or **right-click** the 86Box app on Finder, then select the **Open** option; a new warning will now show up with an "Open" option.
* If you get an **error message** stating "86Box cannot determine the emulated machine's location", just **move the 86Box app** to another folder (`/Applications` is currently not recommended), or **make a copy** of it and open that copy instead.
  * You probably want to keep copies of [**the 86Box app and the ROM set**](/assets/images/v3.4/roms.png) on different folders anyway, as a way of managing multiple emulated machines while there is no 86Box manager app for macOS.
  * Alternatively, you can copy just the 86Box app and use the **system-wide ROM set** feature introduced in v3.4, which is now [documented](https://86box.readthedocs.io/en/v3.5/usage/roms.html); the ROMs should be located on `~/Library/Application Support/net.86box.86Box/roms` in that case ([example](/assets/images/v3.5/appsupport.png)\).

---

## Changelog

### Emulator

* Added **Vulkan renderer**, which performs slightly better on some systems in our testing
* Added detection for **App Translocation** on macOS (an error message is now displayed if macOS has sandboxed the 86Box app - read above on how to fix that)
* Fixed **Windows key** not working on Linux and macOS hosts
* Fixed **hang on exit** issues
* Temporarily removed **XInput2 mouse input** on Linux due to issues with dragging
* Changed audio back-end to **FAudio** on macOS to fix sound issues on some hosts

### Machines

* Added IBM PC clones: **Bondwell BW230**, **Hyosung Topstar 88T**, **Hyundai SUPER-16T/TE**, **Kaypro PC**, **Sanyo SX-16**
* Fixed **Samsung SPC-6000A** not booting
* Updated **Olivetti M24** BIOS to version 1.44

### Hardware

* **Display**
  * Added **IBM 8514/A** add-on graphics accelerator for MCA (original) and ISA (clone)
* **Network**
  * Fixed internal oversight on **Novell NE2000** and compatible cards

### Known issues

* The IBM 8514/A can be selected alongside a video card from S3, which results in **undefined behavior** due to S3 implementing a subset of 8514/A features.
* The **Specify dimensions** option may have no effect or change the screen area to the wrong size if **Lock to this size** is not checked.
